That's why I brought this.
Good afternoon.
Welcome to the Johnson Space Center open house.
We think we've exceeded our expectations.
We thought we'd have about 20,000 people show up today just to the open house.
We think that we're well over 70,000 now.
We thank you.
We certainly thank you for your support.
I'm Sue Garman. I'm the executive assistant to the director of the Johnson Space Center on behalf of all the employees here.
We're happy to have you here. We're happy to have all of our friends and neighbors in.
I'm glad that you support the United States Space Program.
We hope that you have taken advantage and will for the rest of the time that the Space Center is open today of the unique opportunity to look around and see the kind of work that we do to help make sure that we have a human space flight program.
This last session deals with the historic Apollo 13 mission and it features four of the flight controllers who successfully brought the astronauts home.
We're going to follow this with a question and answer session.
I may introduce them in order from my right on on across.
First is Gene Cranff.
Gene holds a degree in aeronautical engineering.
Prior to coming to NASA, he worked as a flight loads test engineer at McDonald Aircraft.
He served as a pilot in the Air Force and he worked as a flight test engineer at Holliman Air Force Base.
He joined NASA in 1960 and worked as a flight director in both the Mercury and Gemini programs.
As a flight director for the Apollo and the Skylab programs, he led the team in mission control during the first lunar landing and the successful return of the Apollo 13 crew.
During the shuttle area era, Gene served as a deputy director of flight operations and the director of mission operations.
He retired from NASA in 1994.
Jerry Griffin.
Jerry Griffin holds a degree in aeronautical engineering.
Prior to coming to NASA, he served as an officer in the Air Force and he worked as an aerospace engineer with the Douglas Aircraft company.
He joined NASA in 1964 and he worked as a flight controller for all of the Gemini flights and as a flight director for all of the 11 Apollo missions.
His positions at NASA included assistant administrator for legislative affairs, deputy associate administrator for man space flight, deputy director of the Dryden Flight Research Center, associate administrator for external relations, and deputy director of the Kennedy Space Center.
He also served as a director of the Johnson Space Center from 1982 until his retirement from NASA.
Next.
Next is Jerry Bostic. Jerry holds a degree in civil engineering.
He joined NASA as an aerospace engineer at the Langley Space Center in 1962 and he transferred to Houston in the same year.
He worked as a flight controller for the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab missions.
He was the flight dynamics officer for the Apollo 13 mission.
His other positions at NASA included executive assistant to the NASA administrator, deputy manager of the Space Shuttle program, and director of mission support.
Since leaving NASA, he has worked as the vice president of space systems for grumman corporation and he is currently the director of business development for Northrop Grumman Technical Services.
And on my far right is John Aaron. John holds a degree in physics.
He joined NASA in 1964 as a vehicle systems engineer for the Gemini program.
John was a flight controller for the Gemini and Apollo missions.
During the Skylab program, he was a section head for electrical power, sequential and instrumentation systems.
His other positions at NASA have included management positions working with spacecraft software, management positions with the space station program, acting assistant administrator for exploration, and assistant director of engineering at the Johnson Space Center.
He is currently the manager of the Systems Engineering Office. Let's welcome all of them.
Thank you.
Okay, this is going to be a very informal session up here. We haven't rehearsed this script.
The Apollo 13, I think, was really had several key points associated with.
The first thing was, I look at it as a real miracle of leadership. We were fortunate all of us up here to grow up under some exemplary leaders.
We had George Miller. We had Jim McDevitt, George Lowe. We had Chris Kraft, Deeks Layton, Dr. Gilruth.
Each of these people gave true meaning to authority with responsibility.
So that when it came time to fly missions, these folks were with us every step of the way. They gave us the job and they expected us to do it.
I think that was one of the real keys to the success of that mission and all the missions that we had in the program.
The second element was associated with the people. The people were universally young.
They were convinced that the impossible was truly possible. They had gone through very rigorous training. They had grown up in the business of mission operations.
And we would spend the days, weeks, months, and eventually the years together, not only working in mission control but working in our offices, building the game plan, developing confidence in ourselves and confidence in each other.
The training personnel we had were the best in the world because those were the ones that gave us the can-do attitude, the never surrender.
And with that kind of a background, we moved into the Apollo program.
There had been several very key missions in Apollo and everyone up here worked those missions.
We went to the moon in Apollo 11. We had difficulties getting down to the surface but we made it.
Apollo 12, where you were struck by lightning and I believe Jerry was the flight director there and you've got another key guy in his right-hand air and you made the calls to get the spacecraft back to life again.
Apollo 13 came along so we were no...
The kinds of problems that we had, we were convinced we could work in the lake.
So I think we were ready at 55-55 when the problem occurred on board the spacecraft.
Everything had been normal up to that time. We had gone through two team rotations. We had four teams going.
We had Milton Lur, the marine flight director who launched the mission I believe Jerry did, actually did the transposition in docking.
I had the lunar orbit insertion. I was going to do the lunar acid.
Glenn Loney was really the guy who was making sure that us rookies in the non-trijectory business did our work properly and by the book.
So we had gone through the two team's successions and everything was optional up to that point. Jerry, why don't you say it?
I'd like to pick up on a couple of... in Amplify a couple of James Remarks.
I think at the time...well I know at the time in my own case in Apollo 13 I was 35.
I probably had more responsibility at age 34, 35, 36 and I've ever had before or since.
And as Jean said, this was really important in Apollo 13 because when we did get into trouble,
the senior management of the agency and the senior management of this center really only had one question of us on the flight control team.
What can we do to help you? They really did leave the decision making to a bunch of young people.
I think Jean was probably 37 and he was probably the oldest flight director on that flight.
I think John Aaron was 27 or something like that. Jerry was 28.
No, you weren't.
Anyway, it was a young person's game and then sometime when I reflect and we'll obviously in this session we'll get into more of the problem and how we fixed it and that sort of thing.
One of the things I thought about after the flight was over and this didn't occur to me during the mission,
as soon as we landed every one of these lunar missions we didn't have much time to dwell on it. We had to go on to the next one.
Well that was no exception in this case. The only difference is we had this big problem.
And the amazing thing to me is that after we landed this was in April 1970.
We had a complete accident investigation. We had a set of congressional hearings.
We had to go fix the problem, redo the command module pretty extensively in the oxygen system.
And we went back to the moon in less than a year. In fact we were there in about 10 months later we flew Apollo 14.
Now that shows you another difference in attitude that existed 25 years ago is when you had a problem and you had this adversity to overcome rather than wailing and gnashing of teeth and worrying about the future.
You set the problem right and charged on because you had not changed your initial goals.
And I think that was very fortunate time with today's oversight and other kinds of problems that you get into.
It would be extremely difficult to do what we did in 1970-71 to get the program back on track.
So I think it's a very interesting historical perspective and it's one we probably ought to keep in mind for the future.
Finally, and I'm not going to say too much about it. I think Jerry Bostic ought to say something about the Apollo they've asked us to talk a little bit about the Apollo 13 movie.
It was a great experience. Jerry and I got to work on it as technical advisors and is an interesting way that project got started.
But maybe Jerry will fill you in on that. And I really do think it's brought alive a lot of interest in the American public.
It's taken us back 25 years and it's brought up some of these successes and overcoming of failures that I think is a very positive thing and it's good for the space program.
Jerry.
I had forgotten how much older you guys were.
The movie has brought a lot of attention back to the mission and it has caused all of us to reflect a lot on what happened 25 years ago.
And it was kind of strange to me at first that almost everyone asked the same question.
Aren't you guys scared to death when the accident happened?
Aren't you running around ringing your hands and pulling your hair out?
And of course the answer was no. And in the next question is why.
Well, the only reason I can think why is because of the training that we had had which was.
I don't think we fully understood it at the time, but it's a good training for any endeavor that you undertake and that is to try to anticipate the problems that are going to happen.
I have a plan of action for anything that you can dream of that will possibly come up.
But in reality after the accident occurred.
And for the next four days while we tried to figure out collectively how to get the crew home, we didn't have a lot of time to.
To worry about anything except the task at hand and there was a time to ring your hands and pull their hair.
It was a great example of teamwork over the past 10 years or so anyway in the in the aerospace industry.
There's been a lot of attention on total quality management and.
Things like that and it.
It occurred to me not too long ago that even though we didn't know it at the time, that's what we were all practicing here at Johnson Space Center 25 and 30 years ago.
It was a true team work. Everybody knew the task that they had to do and we tried to do it the best that we could.
Thank you.
Maybe I could present a little bit of what my role was this mission and give you my impressions of what was accomplished.
I was a systems engineer. I'm manned one of the the controller consoles and mission control center.
My job was since there was two space ships involved going to the moon, one to be the mothership to transport the landing craft the moon called the lunar module.
I was in charge of all the subsystems, all the vital systems and utilities to keep the both the mothership alive and sustained the crew.
So I had a very important responsibility.
My role in the mission was initially to be on the launch phase team as Jean mentioned and that would have rotate me and be in the landing phase.
I wound up being on the part of the team that was charged with the awful decision of trying to decide whether or not to shut the mothership down as a result of this explosion.
How much longer should we spend our precious power versus diagnosis in the system versus the decision to shut it down and depends truly on the lifeboat.
Having been a part of that decision process, we then, while the lifeboat team tried to understand how to get the mothership back in the vicinity of the earth safely,
I was charged with the awful responsibility of leading the team that says given that these guys, the lifeboat team can get us back in the vicinity of the earth,
is there any way to turn this thing back on given this limited power that we've got.
The reason I bring you through that sequence is not only a quaint you with my responsibility was, but I think the thing that I most well fit that mission is,
as I sum it up to people, my conclusion is it works.
Now, what I mean by that is, in any complex endeavor like going to the moon, of which stuff is a very complex endeavor,
and we on the ground here as part of the design team, we did design, design, design, and we did train, train, train, and what if planning,
we tried to cover every contingency we trained day and night.
I think what this mission serves as, it's a model of that.
There is a method by which, you know, I only can train and design for all the cases you think will happen to you,
but that very method and model and training process will help you react in a very successful way to things you never envisioned and never thought you could handle.
We wound up with a situation that we never trained for.
The spacecraft, the mission was certainly never designed for, but those fundamental methods in this management team and this process,
are served to be the thing that got us home.
I think that's a model for our future that says complex endeavors, there is a method to handle the things you don't really train for, but the things you don't.
As usual, John is being extremely modest about his role in the mission.
He had it a team, actually, that had to try to figure out, indeed, how, that we could get the spacecraft back with the consumables that we had on board.
We didn't have enough water, we didn't have enough electricity, we didn't have enough oxygen.
And being a guy who worried about how to get to the people home from an Inflight trajectory standpoint, if I wanted to burn the engine or turn the platform on or anything to use the guidance system,
I was going to go to John to try to convince him that I needed five hours of...
One hour, one hour, one hour, ten minutes.
Actually, at the time, we were at 55 hours into the mission.
We were at our second rotation of the flight control team.
It takes a while to get into the groove.
We always looked towards that trans lunar phase as sort of a way to come up to speed in all of our homework, doing the final tag-ups with the various flight controllers we got.
And just get ourselves ready for the events that would occur once we went into lunar orbit.
We had finished the TV show, secured the downlink, and one of the things the flight controllers always pride themselves in is getting the crew to sleep on time and not having to wake them up during the sleep period.
We were in the process of doing this when we asked the crew to go through a cryo-ster.
And we did this because the cryogen extended to stratify in the tank.
And we always liked to get our best measurement gauging on the cryo-tankage during the crew sleep period because we knew pretty much what their metabolic use was.
So we could get a good handle on our consumables.
So we told the crew to stir the cries, and Jack Swagger reached over, and he flipped four switches.
Down in the ground, within just the next three seconds, three controllers reported the problem.
And there was the guidance officer who identified that we had a hardware restart.
Enco came in and said, Enco is the communications officer that we had switched from narrow to wide beam.
And simultaneously, with that, we got a call from the ECOMS position that we had a main B undervolt.
And about that time, hey, excuse me, Jack Swagger first, and then the level second came down and said, Houston, we got a problem.
And it was funny how your mind works because the first thing I thought, which ones are you talking about?
Are you talking about the hardware restart? The main B undervolt or the communications problem?
And that wiped clear in just a second.
And then you started listening up to the loops and all the controllers started to come on loops because virtually everybody in the control center had some,
we're seeing some symptoms of the problems that occurred.
And it was really confusing for those first two to three to four minutes because the reports kept coming in.
Nothing made sense.
The crew was changing the configuration on board to spacecraft.
So about the time we'd get ready to make some recommendation to them.
That recommendation would change because it changed something else.
The GNNC or the guidance and control guy was worried because he was seeing a lot of pressure decay on the
quads, the RCS jets that we used for attitude control.
And this is because we didn't know it was at that time an explosion.
But a shock had gone through the spacecraft that closed a lot of the valves.
Actually, we were just bringing the propellant and the manifold to the jets and the manifold pressures were decaying.
The spacecraft was in capable of being controlled. It was very difficult three or four minutes.
But then after about three to three and a half minutes, the basic discipline and the training of the team and the quality of the spacecraft
that the controllers started to take over in particular, the control guy recognized that the jets had been the valves had been closed.
And that's why we couldn't control attitudes.
So we now started solving our attitude problem.
The communications guy came up and said, hey, until we get our attitude problem nailed down, let's use the omnithenic.
So now we were getting information constantly into the spacecraft.
The guidance officer, by this time very quickly, had come up and said he had the time of the hardware restart.
So now we could start tracing back in our data at the possible time this occurred.
So the control team over the next 10 to 15 minutes continued to work their problems with one exception.
And that was the ECOM, Cyliburga, who had the consistent problems associated with the fuel cells and the cryogenics.
And it became obvious. We were tracing, we were chasing instrumentation problems early.
But by the time we were about 10 to 15 minutes into this episode, it became obvious that we were seeing some real problems.
But we are still dubious about what information we could truly believe.
But the crew, the controllers, the entire team was coming to the conclusion that we had problems in fuel cells, problems in cries, and it looked like at least two fuel cells were done.
And about this time, about 15 minutes into this entire episode.
We were in the process of changing shift, Lennon, it come in, and turned the gland and told him to get a hold of Chris that he better get in because we're in deep, serious trouble.
And it was just frustrating to see the lifeblood in these fuel cells and cryo-escaping and not being able to do anything about it.
And then Jim Lovell came down and said we're vetting something.
And as soon as he said venting, that then sinked, I think, everybody in the team.
I think everybody is sort of sent a chill down your spine that says, my God, we had some type of an explosion.
And in my mind, the first thought I had was survival.
That we're now in a survival situation.
And these guys up here, it's somewhere along the line in their careers flight controllers, have looked at this thing we call the Doomsday scenario.
And you look at straight in the face, and it's sort of gets your attention.
Let me go ahead.
Interestingly enough, because Jean and I talked about this, when the accident first happened, our thought was, now what do we got to do to go ahead with this landing mission?
And then, and you got to know you got to that survival mode in a couple of steps, because that was the way we were trained.
When it happens, what do we have to do now to make sure we can still land okay?
And Jim Lovell was thinking the same way.
He said, you know, we've had some kind of problem, but we'll get this fixed and go on and land on the moon.
So it was interesting how you kind of step down, and all of a sudden you say there's no more options left.
Now the game is to get them back, and forget the mission of going to the moon.
We never trained to this Doomsday scenario, because it's non-beneficial.
I mean, you end up killing the crew and the controllers, and up going home.
So you never trained to this.
So all of the training that we have, there's always some way out.
And that's a way we're trained.
And it went through my mind, in fact, in the voice loops.
Let's not do anything that's going to blow the mission.
Well, I was still thinking, well, if we can't land in the moon, we're going to go into orbit around the moon kind of thing.
So it's the training process, it's interesting how your mind downloads under this kind of situation.
We continued to work on this thing for the best part of another hour.
We recognized very quickly, and we had two things going for us.
In Apollo 9 mission, we had built something we call the lifeboat procedures.
And about 45 minutes into this crisis, we went and proceeded to start digging out these lifeboat procedures.
Because once you do something like that, you always save it.
The other thing that was useful on this mission was we had done a lot of maneuvers using the LEM spacecraft during Apollo 9.
And all that data was in archives.
So we really started going two directions.
We had to get the data out of archives from the Apollo 9 mission and the rest of controllers to dig out their lifeboat procedures.
So I think that's all that these guys continue for a while.
Yeah.
Interesting.
And I just don't know what made me think of this, but it'll show you a little bit how, by the time we got to Apollo 13, how we were thinking about going to the moon.
This was our third landing mission.
We had been there twice before on 10 and 8 and did not Apollo 10 and Apollo 8 and did not land.
So we, this was not a brand new experience.
And I recall I had, in fact, Jane relieved me.
I was the off-going flight director with my team.
And I was off playing a softball.
I went down to South Houston here somewhere and was playing a softball game with some of the other flight controllers.
And we finished the game and I went back to one of the fellow's apartments to get a cool one.
And we got a call that there had been a problem.
And we'd better get back out to the, to the center.
And I remember walking back, the first time I walked back into the control center, I had all my sweatsuit still from, from baseball or playing softball.
It then became very apparent I better get, I lived in Nassau Bay at that point right across the street here.
I got home very fast to get some sleep because I knew I was going to have to rotate back in the next morning.
Let me draw a slight parallel here with the, with the movie that I'm sure many of you have seen.
Actually my take and I got there probably 30 to 45 minutes after the accident happened.
When I walked in, things were as calm, it looked just like a routine simulation that maybe a training simulation or something.
There were a few more people in the room because people had come back to, to see what was going on and what was happening.
But I'll never be, I never will forget that first look at the thing.
It was, it was a very calm room.
People were going about their business, Gene and, and Glen Loney were at the flight director console talking things over.
And if there was a stillness and a calmness, it was kind of eerie.
The movie probably overplayed a little bit and they had to do that.
In fact, Ron Howard told, Jerry and me both that there's going to be times in this movie where I have to make a video.
I'm going to make it a little more emotional to make it entertaining because it's not a documentary.
It's, it was, it had to be an entertaining movie.
So there, he took a little poetic license or dramatic license in a couple of places.
But let me say this about the movie.
The technical parts of it were correct.
There's a few errors in some of them.
I know some of the, the NASA people could find little errors in the thing that they weren't quite right.
But the technical track and what we did and how we did it was very accurate.
The other thing that that I remember about the, about this first period is the fact that the whole not only the people here at the Johnson Space Center,
but the whole world-wide team responded just like that.
We had recovery forces all over the world.
We had carriers and we had destroyers.
We had helicopters and we had other countries that would help us.
And it was very interesting to see how that all really snapped into action right away.
My team, when I got back on, was heavily involved in trying to plan the right, as Jerry said, the right trajectory to get us back.
And the response, we were moving, steaming carriers and destroyers and moving airplanes all over the world.
And it was just an amazing, amazing logistics kind of effort.
And it all worked and we ended up doing a maneuver after we went around the moon to bring us back to a more favorable position in the Pacific where we had some recovery forces.
We'd left him alone after we got him back on a free return.
They were going to land out in the Indian Ocean with nobody out there.
So we could have probably gotten him back, but it would have been a different time.
Jerry, why don't you cover the trajectory options?
Where we were when the accident happened, what the options were at that time, why we waved off a couple options and what we did from then on.
Okay. Jerry just reminded when he was talking about that, one of the things that the people have forgotten or never knew, I guess, is that at the time the accident happened, we were on what we called a non free return trajectory.
But it's met that it would go around the moon.
If we didn't have to that, I said it would go around the moon, come back toward the earth, but missed by several thousand miles.
In orbit forever.
On the previous flight, 11 and 12 to the moon, we had been on a free return trajectory, which meant if we did nothing to go around the moon and come back and get the earth.
Hopefully at the right angle.
Anyway, as I said, on 13 for the first time, we had departed from that not too long after translinear injection, we had done a small maneuver to get the phasing and the lighting right for the place that we will in the land on 13 and that put us on this non free return.
So, after, within a few minutes after the accident, it was obvious that we had a serious problem and that we weren't going to be landing on the moon or even going in orbit around it.
The main thing we wanted to do from a trajectory standpoint was to get them back to our free return.
We still didn't know what the problem was, we didn't know how severe it was, but everybody agreed that it would be a pretty thing to do to get them on a path that would bring them back to earth.
We left them there for about a day until we went around the moon.
And then, as Jerry mentioned, that free return maneuver that we did, we bring them back to earth, but they had them landing in the end in ocean, which is not a crime spot because we didn't have the recovery forces out there that you would like for and the crimes like that.
So, the next day, we did another large maneuver that sped them up a little bit, got them home a little quicker and moved their landing point over to the Pacific Ocean, which is a place where we would like to have it, even though we were worried about a hurricane coming up in a top and I guess they call them out there.
So, we had a storm, and we kept bouncing around through that area that added a bit of spice to our life.
But while the trajectory guys were trying to figure out how to get them back, what engines we could burn because the type of maneuvers that we were, the type of maneuvers that we needed to do, you would normally use the main engine on the service module.
And we rightfully so concluded that it was available anymore. We didn't know that really until later on, but we didn't want to take the rest.
But while we were trying to figure out what engines to burn and how much and how quick to get them back and what ocean to put them in, John and his guys were trying to figure out how to squeeze everything they could out of the consumables because it would be academic if we got them back to the right.
I don't know if it was right ocean at the right time, but they ran out of oxygen four days or.
My concern was while you were off computing all these very large and very delicate maneuvers that you had to do, my concern was that what jury represented me, it took a lot of power and a lot of consumables to represent what he did.
I'd like to pick up at that point and comment that they mentioned earlier about being scared.
The rest of the team may not have been scared, but with respect to what the oxygen tanks meant to the mission, let me put that in context for you.
When I heard that the oxygen tanks were the thing they had a problem when you go through the worst case scenario, those oxygen tanks were the lifeline of the mission because oxygen is not only obviously what the crew breathes, but these spacecrafts were very white, efficient designed.
Oxygen was the thing that you not only breathed, you took oxygen and made electricity out of it.
It was a bioprotomechan electricity that produced water. Water was the thing that the crew had to drink, reconstitute the food, and then we used the final aspects of the water to cool the equipment.
So literally the oxygen tanks were the thing that was at the top of the supply line for all the critical things that sustained the spacecraft.
When we began to look at giving that primary power system was gone, a whole new set of thinking, a whole new team spring into action.
Right after we got the command module turned down and actually turned it off.
We all assembled in a room and tried to decide what could we do.
This is when the resources of the whole country came alive with respect to the team we put together.
It's easy to visualize that you get a lot of help coming in from all the country.
The most difficult thing to do sometimes is to ask the right questions, set up the right scenarios so that you can get productive use of that help that comes in around the country.
I think one of the things, the leadership of that offline team that we set up in that offline room that was really the thing that put together that totally non-traditional sequence of how we could turn the command module back on.
Lever is not only the people that were trained in that room but we leveraged the whole country and the whole world with respect to how does this hard very really work?
Can we drain just a little bit more out of it?
To pose you use it this way. I know you didn't design it that way. It's not supposed to work that way but could we do it?
That invoked a team that we had offline going that literally pulsed every manufacturer in this whole country.
Yeah, the John was talking about the 210 operations or about six things that had to be done down there.
The first one was to, and Jerry mentioned it, how to figure out how to use this lunar propulsion systems to do all of the maneuvers we needed to get back home.
We're fortunate because we had a starting point with the maneuvers that we had used in Apollo 9.
John talked about the power profile, the initial indications we had. We're about day short in power profile.
Right when we started and then Glenn and I came up with the scheme to keep powered up until we went around the backside of the moon, which made us almost two days short the John had to figure out.
Before we could start getting better, we made things a heck of a lot worse there.
There were a couple other key folks. One of the things we had to do is to, and before we could power down, was to figure out how to realign our navigation system.
Because we were, the spacecraft was cruising along in a floating cloud of frozen oxygen molecules and debris from the explosion and crew couldn't use any of their optics and see out through this cloud.
Phil Schaffer was one of the guys who was tagged from the trench to come up with the techniques for platform realignment.
And we had to have that procedure nailed down and confidence in before we could power down and let give John the time at which we powered in.
So then in addition to that, then we had to figure out how we're going to power that because in the power up, there were a lot of the systems in the command module.
They were concerned might be frozen up water batteries, those kinds of things. And then they had to reenter. Now the one thing that in all of my planning and bookkeeping work we did, I had completely overlooked was this live thing.
And this is where a great outfit called the spacecraft analysis team came in. And this is where again, the core engineering of Johnson came in.
They recognized that the flight control team had their hands full with what they were trying to do. They also recognized that eventually we'd fill up that entire spacecraft with CO2.
And again, as we say, this was a problem that had to be solved. They want about solving the thing and procedure. I think they brought the solution into you. Didn't they, Jerry?
Which is real neat. So why don't you talk about that? Well, that was a thing done by our engineering folks here is that got turned on as Jean was talking about lithium hydroxide is what liao means.
It's a canister like something like your air conditioner filter. It filters the air that the crew is breathing and it takes out the carbon dioxide and captures it in this lithium hydroxide trap.
Well, we didn't have enough of those of the right shape and size. And in the movie, if you'll remember, they made this device out of a through a bunch of stuff on the table. Didn't quite happen that way, but that's closer.
Through a bunch of stuff on the table and said, look, this is what these guys have on board. Let's figure out how to run this, put a square peg in around hole essentially.
So using duct tape and flight plan covers, they were able to use a command module canister in the lunar module hole. Now what that did then is in the, we used a measurement called the partial pressure CO2.
If that gets up, if it gets up to what about 15 parts per million and it gone, that's where it gets dangerous. People start thinking fuzzy and it can kill them and they pass out and then die of CO2 poisoning.
It was up about 12 or 13 when they finally put this fix up against the hole in the command module taped it all in, blocked up all the vents and immediately the pressure partial pressure CO2 started to drop and it went down below one.
Actually, it worked as good as the lunar module canister. So that was a, you talked about, and I know many of you guys in GALS are involved in your own shops and that kind of thing. That's the kind of plan it was. It was a little bit like a scavenger hunt. See what you can find and make this thing work. Any work extremely well.
One of the things that kept bothering us all the way through the reentry phase, or the returned earth phase was this trajectory shallowing because by this time we had had a pretty good handle. We didn't have all the solutions but we had a pretty good handle on the problems we had.
We saw ourselves converging solution wise, the crew saw the earth coming up but the one nagging thing that was always there was this trajectory shallowing.
Jerry, why don't you talk about what you do and do that? You really test in his memory.
Well, for all of us, it seemed like we had one problem after another. At the time we would get one solved or we thought it had a solved.
We would be faced with another one. But obviously to come back to re-earned into the earth and survive, you have to hit it at the right angle. And as Jean said, we kept getting more shallow, more shallow, more shallow.
We would hit the atmosphere and skip out like a rock on a pond. And we really couldn't figure out what was causing it. We kept asking all the systems guys, what are you vending?
As a result of that, we had to do a last minute mid course corridor control burn. I guess we call it to make sure that we hit the right angle when we entered the earth.
We entered the earth's atmosphere. But it turned out that we were vending something. It was one of those things that was designed as a non-propulsive bent.
But we learned that it's real hard to design and manufacture a non-propulsive bent in space. So it was almost a continuous small perturbation to the trajectory that was enough to over several hours to change the course.
It was, these kind of nagging prongs really bother you because you don't have any answer form. And when they came up with their final maneuver, we had just finished reading up two hours of checklists up to swigart and he had those copied.
And then one hour of checklists to haze and then the trench comes in and says by the way we need another maneuver. And I mean this was sort of frustrating because everybody sort of tired. But anyway, everything turned out the way it should have been.
Then we got up finally to the big time. John had got us enough power now that we were very comfortable with the power margins we had. And in fact, we had sufficient power in the limb spacecraft to start charging the command and service module batteries, which now we had moved positive power margins. So John, why don't you take us from there through entry and then we'll go for questions.
Now, Jean mentioned that the key thing was power because the to give you a feel for how much we were talking about normally the mothership was never powered down the space. We powered up.
So when we powered up was always on the ground. Now, you took six or eight hours of very intense sequences to do. We couldn't have enough power to do that. We had enough for about an hour and a half at a very reduced level because the oxygen was all gone of the normal power was all gone. We were down to the about the equivalent of three car batteries that had been already discharged as I'm degreeing.
The secret was the key was how we could do that. We only had a certain amount of power. And as Jerry said, we put together a process whereby they essentially made my team the power brokers.
Ever, everything that anybody wanted to do with that spacecraft, they had to come with us and convince us that we had to turn it on. And our usual answer was no. You don't get it. You got to do this a different, you got to do this a different way. Think about doing it this way.
In the end, what we did was invent a sequence that and not too long in terms I referred to as we just powered up the spaceship backwards. Normally the way you power up the spaceship as you turn on all the support systems so that you do a very orderly process all the basic support systems and then start turning on the sophisticated systems like the guidance systems and so forth.
We decided to power the spaceship up in the blind. We went to turn the long lead guidance systems on first, assuming that the crew would do it perfectly and everything would go exactly as planned with no margin. And then we would turn on the support systems last.
So that so that meant we had no insight into that, but that did give us one chance to do this and it depended on the crew doing it perfectly. And after four days of almost no water, no sleep, they did do it perfectly.
That was turned out to be the key to the sequence of how we could do it.
So anyway, they probably the greatest sight as we were going through this final power up. I think every flight controller for every team was sitting somewhere within the control room.
The viewing room was full to overflowing all of our instructors and thank God for our instructors. They were often the training room off to the right.
And it really still I still get misty to these days because going through this blackout and I don't think anybody has ever explained why the blackout we were almost two minutes longer.
Normally, we were normally four minutes. This here was almost six minutes. And I'll tell you what, your heart, as you'd call up, you exit blackout and boy, give a call and then silence.
And then you give another call and then silence. And you watch that clock in the wall count up and up and then try it again and every concern you ever had relative to the mission really starts to grab a hold in your second air.
And then all of a sudden, it's real neat. You got a call, a riot, a OS. And then from the carrier, you had the reports of the sonic booms.
Okay, then you had radar contact and then three beautiful parachutes. Oh boy, were they beautiful. And from then on, boy, it was celebrating.
I mean, it was get the cigars out and we'll always wait until the crews and the deck of the carrier. But boy, if there's ever a luscious smell that these kids today aren't going to get it's that it's that whole room full of cigar smoke with people cheering.
Pat and each other in the back flagging the American flags, etc. And boy, I hope someday that when our kids today take the next generation to Mars, somebody's going to reopen that room for cigar smoke and again.
I guess it's time to ask questions. If any of you have questions, just I think there's microphones. Come on up.
Yeah, there's Michael over in the other side also the same. Well, somebody's getting to the microphone. Let me just add one thing right quick. I alluded to it and I thought the proud father sitting on my right might say something about it. But the reason Apollo 13, the movie, came to be a real project was because of jury, Bostick's son, Mike, Mike's a young 32 year old, been in California for a few years, worked for Ron Howard for a number of years.
He went to Clear Lake High School, his job was finding properties to make movies out of. And he heard about this book that Jeff Cleager and Jeff Cleager were going to write. It hadn't even been finished.
But Mike took the concept to Ron and Ron bought it and we now have this very successful movie. But it all started with Jerry's son.
I just have two questions. First one is what happened to the service module and the landing module and they were jettison. I was never clear where they went. Did they reenter or burned up somewhere?
They burned up Earth's atmosphere. Okay. The movie sort of, I thought, shed a not too good light on the contractor support there. And as a new employee of one of the contractors.
I just curious what if that's that if that was true at the time and what it's like now. No, it was not true. And if there was one thing I didn't like about the movie because it happened to work for that company.
And I might add in a very nice way. But I would add that within the contractors and state design and built and tested it to specifications with NASA offered up. There was constant given.
But between can we do this beyond what despite the hard words designed to do and there always was this given tape. We were there was a very constructive given tag between the contractor community and the NASA engineers. But it was always very constructive. There was never an adversarial relationship. That was an amazing team. And it was hard sometimes to find the scene between the NASA engineers and the contractor engineers. We were one homogenous team.
Let me add to the movie because this is it's a good point that you caught it when we got to that piece of it. Jerry and and I both said, Ron, you need to be careful with that because that's not exactly the way it happened.
Well, before we started shooting the movie, Ron told us he said, anytime you see anything wrong, any of you guys let us know. And he said, in about I guess 95% of the time 96 maybe he accepted everything and would turn it around. But he told us he said, there are going to be times when I'm going to say, thank you for your input. And now I've got to make a movie. And that was the one case where he did.
I just wanted to ask a question. You mentioned all the redundancy and the training. When I also read the book, nobody ever obviously conceived that the lunar module had to support them. But the CO2 canisters, why didn't somebody think to make them interchangeable from the very beginning?
That's good question.
What I would suggest you do, you know, they're building a space station here. I would suggest you maybe look at compatibility between maybe some of the US and the Russian systems so that that kind of a problem doesn't occur.
Well, I think if you think about it, the object was to get the moon. The way to get the moon was for a large team and organized about what I divide and conquer. And you give major organizations a major job and you let them do it. And the business about, well, one solution may be a square peg and the other solution may be around home.
We had cases of life like that. But that was what was involved in that you would do that. But to go back and make all your specifications across the board, compatibility takes time. It takes money. And we were about going to the moon in 69, not about designing bio-canon shirts that were interchangeable.
And it was a move to the design.
Yeah, and one other point too. The lunar module, many of you know, is probably blessed, hard boy, it always performed well. But it was probably it was one of the ugliest children we ever, you know, had.
And it was designed for functionality. And I suspect that the reason that that canister was was was round. And it was a geometry issue because that cockpit was just cram full of stuff.
And it was tight. But it didn't have it had a little more flexibility. You could get that bigger square canister in there.
It also had a different shape. The volume was a bit. The volume was different. That's it.
I have two questions. One is, why did the projector keep on getting shower? And the other one is, what if this explosion had taken place on the way back from the moon? Could you have gotten back?
I'm sorry, I didn't hear the second one. What if the explosion had taken place on the way back from the moon instead of on the way to the moon? Could you have gotten back?
Okay.
Well, we found that later, the reason the trajectory was was showering is that we were boiling off helium in the lunar module.
And as I mentioned, it was supposed to be going through a non-propulsive band.
But there is no such thing. Little bit of thrust. Little bit of thrust.
There it was. It was moving.
If the explosion had happened on the way back from the moon and we didn't have the lunar module, we wouldn't have made it.
And if it had been, you know, the same type of malfunction, we wouldn't have made it.
In fact, believe it or not, it happened about the only time in the mission we could have done anything about it.
It was late enough that we could squeeze the consumables out of the limb to get back. And it was earlier enough that we still had the limb and all of this capability.
Four quarters.
Two questions over here.
One quick one is that as maybe this was dramatic license on Ron Howard's part, but that control burn to improve the angle seemed to be like about a stable as a bottle rocket.
Was it really that unstable?
I guess the second. Yes, sir.
What they did there is, and it was much of a, what happened in the movie?
When they first filmed, I guess if he had put most of everything he wanted to in there, he would have been a four hour movie.
He was saying maybe we're going to have another war and peace here. So he had to chop it down.
And what he was trying to depict, it was a very level on the first burn that they did in a dock fashion.
He and Fred Hayes had to learn a whole new way of controlling the vehicle because the center gravity had of this pair had changed.
And when you fired trying to translate, it would rotate the whole stack.
And when you tried to translate or rotate it would translate.
So they had to figure out new controls, a little bit like Revenger, head and panacea stomach or vice versa.
Yes, so what you saw in the movie was digging the first burn.
It was more of a composite of all three major burns that we did, but more like the first one.
And so they got that learning curve, the crew got that learning curve down later, where they were actually pretty comfortable in doing this.
And I think Fred Hayes control role and swagger time the engine burn and level handle pitch.
And so they finally got this thing down to where they could control it.
But what Ron was trying to show is that there was this problem, it was different. And so we kind of got compressed.
But I like your bottle rocket term. That's pretty accurate description.
The first burn they did had a lot of.
A lot of that. I guess the second question is that after all this, after the guidance is all hosed up, how close to the ship did they actually land?
Close.
You know, I don't remember, but you could see it from the ship.
Yeah, it was close.
It was one of the closest ones that we had.
Yeah, I remember we moved the carrier a mile off the entry because we almost hit one.
Yeah, what's the carrier?
One of the things, actually, they final burn, they overburdened.
They actually targeted the overburden there, which brought us in a bit short, which brought us closer to the carrier than we had been previously.
It was close. It was within eyesight of the carrier.
It was two miles, two to five miles.
Thank you.
We overburdened to make sure that we knew that it wasn't going to show out anymore anymore.
But it won the steepest of the movie.
Well, first I'd like to congratulate you on your performance in the mission, and I would like to say that you are true American heroes.
Thank you.
Well, my question is, well, before the crew jettisoned the service module, you had no idea of the extent of the explosion.
And of course, after it was jettisoned, the crew took a picture of it as it was floating away towards the atmosphere.
What was going through your mind whenever you saw those pictures for the first time seeing how massive the explosion was?
I think this is a good question for everybody.
For my mind, because we had had a very intense debate in the control center, it was relatively short, whether to use the service propulsion engine.
And Sarlovis lined up, I lined up and said, hey, we don't want to use it because we don't know what happened back there.
The first thing that went through my mind was, thank God, we didn't use it.
We tried to do that.
Yeah, that's first thing.
And of course, remember, we didn't see that picture immediately because we had to get the camera, but we didn't have TV on it.
The crew took the picture, but they described it.
And Jim said the whole panel on the side of that thing is blown out.
The word picture, I had the same reaction that Jean did is, I had two thoughts.
One was, thank God we didn't use the service engine, service propulsion system.
But the second thing was, I wonder what's going to happen to that heat shield because the heat shield was the next question, just from his word description.
It was frightening.
My main thought was, I'm glad we didn't see it earlier because we didn't have that in the world.
I'm really worried a lot more.
How long did the actual explosion last?
16 seconds.
From the time they flipped the switches until the panel was gone.
This is kind of a two part question.
I'd like to find out what each of you, briefly, what each of you is doing now.
And in second, is there any way that you feel that your knowledge and expertise and that of others like you could be more fully utilized now and in the future?
I'll tell you what, we'll go this way here saying, what are we doing now and then they'll start that way.
What can we do in the future?
What I'm doing right now is I literally did retire. I'm building an aerobatic by plane. It's essentially complete.
I got final painting to do a hope to be flying at this December. I also have been doing air shows throughout the last two summers and a flight engineering position to be 17 with the Lunnstern.
I took early retirement from NASA in 1986 and went on the last ten years I've been involved in the private sector and a number of different businesses.
And I'm currently living up in the hill country up near Curville in the little town of Hunt.
If any of you know where that is, we're all the camps are.
But I'm still a consultant. I chair the board of a public company that is based in California.
And I'm still in the executive search business, but please no resumes today.
I'm still in the aerospace business working for Grumman, a contractor here at JSC.
And I hope to continue to be in the space business the rest of my life.
The second part of the question.
I might to come in on that. If you go over to the new control center here now and see what I call young kids operating over here.
What they do, I feel real inadequate with what we did back in the old days.
They have some real sharp people over there. They know what they're doing.
And from a mission control standpoint, today NASA is in good hands.
I'm still at NASA. I head up assistant engineering office where I still do engineering management and try to be mentors to young engineers coming up.
I'm still a youngster at 52. So I've got a lot of time here at the Johnson Space Center.
I hope to serve that role to bring up the new programs that we are working on.
Space Station Space Shuttle, me on as well as be mentors to new engineers.
I'd like to take a shot at that second question too.
In Jerry hit part of it.
I believe if all the good work that we did in Apollo, I think was important and I'm very proud of it.
But I think perhaps one of the best things or accomplishments we had was to leave a legacy to carry on in much the same way.
And when Jerry says the young people over in the control center today are a lot smarter basically than we are and we were.
I'm not sure they're any better, but they're a lot smarter.
They're a lot smarter and they got better tools.
But I think the thing that is best about it is that they have retained that decision making capability.
As far as I can tell, management at the higher levels have not penetrated into it with the micro management fingers.
And I hope it stays that way.
A lot of this had to do incidentally and reason I wanted to answer this for Gene did.
Gene had a lot to do with this.
Gene was all of our bosses.
He started a trend.
He and Chris Kraft working together in those years of the late 50s, early 60s, set a tone that has carried forward to today in mission operation.
Now I say he was always the boss.
I came back in 82 as the center director so I had him render me for a while.
But I never did get control of him.
I really about two or three very quick thoughts there.
They talked about mission control and the motto they've got is Achievement through excellence.
And I believe it's this excellence which has allowed the people today to be as good possibly even better than they were in the past.
So really they've got a standard of excellence they've set.
The expectations they say are set on themselves.
Everybody up here understands the words we use discipline, morale, tough and competent.
Those are what we must be ourselves and that is what we expect others to be.
I think that is good and I think there's a legacy that's been passed on.
We were very fortunate again to be brought up.
Chris Kraft we used to call the teacher for a very straightforward reason.
I remember the first day I ever stepped up to the flight director's job and he always had a hand over in there.
And I said Chris where's your hand over and there wasn't one.
He says what do you want me to do?
He says he's head set away.
He says you're the flight director and he walks off council.
So I think there's that kind of a legacy from a standpoint of management that we really have to be careful.
Because if we're to be successful in space flight because space flight doesn't take a lot of second guessing.
And people got to respond very quickly.
They have to be part of the game plan from the very beginning to the time they execute this thing.
There is such thing as personal responsibility and accountability and that still must remain with the people.
So if there's a message for the generation of managers we've got around here, you cannot corrupt the accountability and responsibility.
It has to be in the hands of the people doing the job. That's it.
Let's give them all a big hand.
That concludes our program for this afternoon.
The open house will be shutting down at four o'clock so the facilities will be closing.
But we're glad to have had you here today. We hope you've seen the pride that we have and the work that we do.
There will be the balloons lifting off at six o'clock out by rocket park. Thank you.